a war has been raging for billions of
years
killing trillions every single day while
we don't even notice
the war is fought by the single
deadliest entity on our planet
the bacteriophage or phage for short
[Music]
a phage is a virus not quite alive
not quite dead also they look as if
someone made them up
their head is an icosahedron a sort of
dice with 20 faces and 30 edges
it contains the genetic material of the
virus and often sits on a long tail
that has lead-like fibers there are more
phages on earth than every other
organism combined
including bacteria and they are probably
everywhere living things exist
billions are on your hands in your
intestines
and your eyelids right now which might
make you nervous
since phages are responsible for the
majority of deaths on earth
but you're lucky while they do commit
genocide for breakfast
they only kill bacteria up to 40 percent
of all bacteria in the oceans are killed
by them every single day
but phages also have major flaws like
any other virus
phages need a host to survive and
reproduce
they're not much more than genetic
material in a hull and they specialize
usually a phage has chosen one specific
bacteria
and maybe some of its very close
relatives
these are its prey imagine a phage as
like a cruise missile that only hunts
and kills members of one very unlucky
family
when a phage finds its victim it
connects its tail fibers with receptors
and uses a sort of syringe to puncture
the surface
in a weird motion the phage squeezes its
tail
and injects its genetic information
within minutes
the bacteria is taken over it's now
forced to manufacture
all the parts of new phages they only
stop when the bacteria is filled up with
brand new phages
in the final step they produce endolysin
a powerful enzyme that punches a hole in
the bacteria
the pressure is so high that the
bacteria sort of vomits out all of its
insides and dies
new phages are released and begin the
cycle anew
in the last few years bacteriophages
have enjoyed the attention of the second
deadliest beings on earth humans
recently we've started looking into
injecting millions of them into our
bodies
because we're sort of getting desperate
we screwed up
in the past a single cut or a sip from
the wrong puddle could kill you
bacteria were our phages tiny monsters
that hunted us mercilessly
but then about 100 years ago we found a
solution in nature
by accident we found fungi that produced
a compound that killed bacteria
antibiotics suddenly we had a powerful
superweapon
antibiotics was so effective that we
stopped thinking of bacteria as monsters
only the old and weakest among us were
killed by them
we used antibiotics more and more for
less and less serious causes
we lost respect for the monsters and the
weapon
but bacteria are living things that
evolve and one by one
they started to become immune against
our weapons
this continued until we had created what
are called
superbugs bacteria immune to almost
everything we have this immunity
is spreading across the world as we
speak by 2050
superbugs could kill more humans a year
than cancer
the days when a cut or bladder infection
or a cough could kill you
or your loved ones are coming back in
the u.s
alone more than 23 000 people die from
resistant bacteria
each year but it turns out that
phages our tiny killer virus robots
could save us we can inject them into
our bodies to help cure infections
hold on how can injecting millions of
viruses into an infection
be a good idea phages are very very
specialized killers of bacteria
so specialized in fact that humans are
completely immune to them
we are too different we encounter
billions of phages every day
and we just politely ignore each other
antibiotics are like carpet bombing
killing
everything even the good bacteria in our
intestines that we don't want to harm
phages are like guided missiles that
only attack what they're supposed to
wait a minute if we use phages to kill
bacteria
won't bacteria develop ways of defending
themselves
well it's more complex than that phages
evolve
too there has been an arms race between
them and bacteria for billions of years
and so far they're doing great this
makes phages
smart weapons that are constantly
getting better at killing
but even if bacteria were to become
immune against our phage
we still might be able to win it turns
out
that in order to become resistant to
even just a few species of phages
bacteria have to give up their
resistance to antibiotics
we might be able to trap them in a
catch-22
this has already been successfully
tested with a patient who had no other
hope left
the bacteria pseudomonas aeruginosa one
of the most feared bacteria
infected the man's chest cavity
they are naturally resistant to most
antibiotics and can even survive an
alcoholic hand gel
after years of suffering a few thousand
phages were directly inserted into his
chest cavity
together with antibiotics the bacteria
were immune to
after a few weeks the infections had
completely disappeared
unfortunately this treatment is still
experimental and
pharma companies are still reluctant to
invest the necessary billions in a
treatment
that has no official approval yet but
things are finally changing in 2016 the
largest phage clinical trial to date
began
and phages are getting more and more
attention
and we better get used to it because the
era in which
antibiotics have been our super weapon
is drawing to a close
it might be a weird concept but
injecting the deadliest being on planet
earth directly into our bodies
could save millions of lives
this video was made possible by a grant
from the bill and melinda gates
foundation
if you'd like to support kurzgesagt you
can do so on patreon.com and get fancy
things in return